As we continue our exploration of money
and the economy, we speak with Ellen Brown,
author of the book, and website,
Web of Debt.
Ellen writes extensively on the history
of money and what needs to be done to break
the cartel that is known as the Federal Reserve
Banking System.
She gives a compact history lesson on money here,
reaching back to the days of Benjamin Franklin
in early America, where he was instrumental
in setting up a public bank in Pennsylvania,
that sounds much like what we need today.
So I don't think it's a surprise to anybody
that we have some severe economic woes
running in the background of our lives here,
certainly in America, but in much of the west
and even trickling out to all corners
of the planet right now.
And the presentation that you gave yesterday,
what I love, we've talked to you before
on my radio show, but what I really love about
this is your detailing of how this crazy
unsustainable system was foisted upon
the people to begin with.
So if you don't mind, Ellen, let's go back
to the 17th century and how this thing
known as fractionalized reserve banking
began and what the danger in this is to us now.
Before the 17th century, it was the sovereign
right of the king or queen to create money.
No one, no individual could do it.
And then in 1666 there was the passage
of the Coinage Act which allowed private
coinage of money.
So the goldsmiths were coining, making coins
for people, and people would leave their
money with the goldsmiths for safekeeping,
but they didn't necessarily want to carry,
they didn't want to carry this heavy gold around,
and so the goldsmiths would give them these
little paper receipts, called bank notes.
When they became banks, they called them
bank notes.
And meanwhile, other people would want
to borrow those receipts,
or they'd want to borrow gold, but they didn't want
to carry the gold around either because
it's heavy, it was dangerous, people might rob you.
So everybody preferred trading in these little
paper receipts.
So, the goldsmiths would then give them these
receipts which were supposedly redeemable
in gold, and they quickly discovered that they
could lend 10 times as many notes, up to
10 times as many notes as they actually had
gold because most people only came
for their gold 10 percent of the time, and
therefore, basically, 90 percent of these
notes were counterfeit.
So in essence, only they could
count on the fact that at any given time
only 10 percent of the money would be
called in, the gold coins would be called in.
Right, that people would actually come for their gold.
This is very dishonest.
And that is the same system we have today.
10 percent fractional reserve system, where
technically you're supposed to have 10 percent
in the bank for backing however much you lend.
So banks, actually create 90 percent of their
loans on their books.
Well, actually they create 100 percent of their
loans on their books, because they take in your
deposit, they don't lend out your deposit.
You never go into your bank and they say,
"I'm sorry."
You know, you ask for your money and they say,
"I'm sorry, we just lent that to Mr. Smith,
"and you can have it back in 30 years."
You always can get your money.
Your money stays in the bank.
They're using that as the base, or the reserves
against which they issue 90 percent of their
deposits and then the loans they create become
a deposit which then increases their deposit base
so they can lend 90 percent of that and 90
percent of that.
In the end, you've got 10 dollars of deposits,
can support 100 dollars in loans.
So this has been going on since the
17th century?
Yeah.
And where, what are the
implications in the mess that we're seeing
today of this kind of banking?
What has actually occurred by way
of even more extreme abuses?
'Cause this system is set up for abuses,
to begin with because it's very dishonest
system at it's core.
Unsustainable for sure.
Yeah.
So, because the banks, the banks actually
got around this fractional reserve requirement
which was set by the Federal Reserve,
and so another organization called the
Bank for International Settlements, a private,
the private head of the private central banking
system in Basel, Switzerland, came out
with these capital requirements which said,
they're very complicated, but it's like,
they're risk weighted, and there's, you need
like four percent tier one capital and eight
percent tier one plus tier two capital,
but basically the bottom line is that the bank
for international settlements was saying
you need to have some real capital here
against which you create your loans.
So, places like Japan did it that way
and the Japanese banks when the Basel One
accords came out in 1988, the Japanese
banks were crushed by this new capital requirement,
but the US, the Wall Street banks
which were like the international banks
are international banks,
got around it by selling off their loans
to investors.
So this was truly an unfair
advantage, in a sense, over the Japanese
banks who were trying to comply at that time.
Right, actually I'm not sure why
the Japanese banks didn't do the same thing
our banks did, but anyway, that's what
our banks did.
Was that they securitized their loans.
So, that's why they got into all this subprime,
'cause who cares whether they're risky loans
if you're gonna sell them off to investors.
So you don't have them on your books anymore
you're no longer responsible for them.
So they separated, it used to be, it was your
bank that held your loan for 30 years,
of course the bank would make sure that you
were gonna pay it back and they only made
responsible loans.
But once they figured out that they could
just get rid of these loans, they would make
a loan to anybody that walked in the door.
Because they got all these fees and commissions
and bonuses.
And that's where they were really
making their money, then they sell all of the package
of loans off, they off them to some other entity,
mortgage entity or something.
Right, and ultimately they'd be sold to
a pool of investors.
So if you get the investors to buy, they wrap
them, they said, don't worry there may be some
dodgy collateral in here, but we've sold off
the risk to this other set of investors, and these
are the derivatives, where they sold
credit default swaps off to usually hedge funds.
But what nobody checked to see
was whether the hedge funds really had the money.
I mean they're all just gambling.
So the hedge funds are gambling that
they're not going to have widespread default.
And if they do, they think, "Oh well,
we'll just go bankrupt."
And you know, they'll step away from the corporate veil so
they'll get to keep their winnings for the
previous seven or eight years.
I mean, that's what did happen.
Yes.
That when the two Bear Stearns hedge funds
collapsed in the summer of 2007, that was
the beginning of the end of this whole system,
but up till then they'd made a lot of money.
And nobody's gone to jail, I mean they all
went home with their money and they said,
"OK, you're right, we don't have the money,
"we're bankrupt."
I don't know if this is a fair thing
to ask, but percentage wise, from your
knowledge and research, what would you guess
are the actual percentage of some of the
dodgy stuff that was in those portfolios
that were offed?
I don't know, but I did see a very interesting
thing about how they did it in tranches.
Have you seen that?
Uh huh.
Where, say you have, in theory you have
your triple A investments, which is, you've
got this whole pool of home loans, and some
of them will go into default.
I mean, like all of them, pretty much
all of them were risky loans.
But only a few of them would go into
default, of course, there's only statistical odds.
So the theory was that the triple A's were
all the, that the triple B's, the riskiest
investments, they would get the ones that
went into default first.
That's one reason they had a paper trail
problem because nobody really knew which
homes belonged to which investors until
they defaulted.
Right.
So then when they defaulted,
the triple B people got the bad home loans,
and supposedly these triple A's would never
go into default.
But of course what happened was they all,
the whole thing was infected.
And then also, when people no longer
trusted those credit default swaps to
protect them against risk, the buyers
just quit buying.
So that whole, it was called the
shadow lenders, that whole secondary
market for home loans has gone away.
And that's why we've had a huge credit freeze
and a huge depression, or recession.
So it's a multi-tiered problem, but
certainly something, one of the aspects of that
is that we can't get credit as we could even a year ago.
So, this is a big issue in terms of starting
to freeze down the economy.
And then secondly, because of the loans
that were being made that are now called
toxic assets, those loans are never going
to be paid off.
Those are in default.
Thirdly, we're not really seeing, we haven't
really begun to see the full effects of this,
because is my understanding, it's my understanding
that where once when a house went
into foreclosure, for example,
it had to be on the books after 90 days.
And as I understand it, that has been
extended to a couple of years now.
So we're not really seeing what's even on the books.
Because the institutions would be almost
in a position of failure over night.
Exactly.
That's why they're not foreclosing on these
homes that they should foreclose on,
because you notice they're reporting
that they're profitable.
Well they would not be profitable if they had
to report all their real losses.
OK, so we're certainly being
kept in the dark there.
However, the good news is that, and there are others,
oh gosh I've forgotten which of the legislators
on Capitol Hill, she's even in Michael Moore's movie,
famous for saying--
Is it Marcy Kaptur?
Yeah.
Become a squatter in your own home.
So, from a people point of view, if you've gotten
yourself into a position where you've lost your job
and you can't pay, you can certainly,
probably comfortably stay in your home
for a while before anyone's going to really
come and take it away from you.
Right?
And justifiably because they really did,
there really was a scam going on.
Yes.
So, these people, many of them have good
defenses to foreclosure.
Usually, what do you call it, fraudulent...
What am I thinking of, oh, predatory lending.
Oh, predatory lending.
Where the people that negotiate
with you tell you that it's one thing
and then later you find out that it's something else.
You know, they didn't tell you that it was
gonna reset in six months or two years or whatever.
Right.
And of course they can say, "Well, you should have
"read the thing."
But people just don't, I mean, you've seen those
real estate contracts, they're so complicated.
30-40 pages long.
And you trust the guy that, I mean you feel
like a fool if you say, "Oh, well wait, I wanna
"read it, no I wanna read every word."
I'll be back in two weeks, after I read it.
Yeah, so you just say: "OK, what does it say?"
And the guy says: "Well, it says this and this"
and you say "OK".
But so, now if you try to raise that defense,
they say, these have all been sold off to investors,
the investors are, there's a trustee in charge,
while there is this thing called the mortgage electronic...
Mortgage Electronic Registry Services
which is a private company
and 60 million homes,
60 million mortgages are now held in the name of MERS,
this MERS, Mortgage Electronic Registry Services.
More and more cases are coming down saying that
they do not have title, I mean they do not have standing
to foreclose, they are just an agent and they don't have
the proper standing.
What they've done is separate the deed of trust
from the mortgage which is the promise to pay
or the right to--
Right.
They don't have standing to foreclose on your home,
they don't have a signed piece of paper that has
your name on it and their name on it
which is what you have to have under basic contract law
to foreclose on real estate.
There have been cases of people that have left their
homes, their foreclosure has gone through
and somebody else comes along
and tries to foreclose and tries to collect
a deficiency judgment 'cause you really don't know
who owned that property.
Now, my understanding is you can order up
what is called mortgage forensics report which goes through
and starts tracking, actually if that paper even exists.
Like you say, often times it doesn't exist at all,
it's been sold and resold and resold, those papers,
those original documents that you would need,
promise to pay along with deed of trust don't exist
in which case what is the legal standing of an individual
if that document cannot be produced?
It depends, different courts are holding different ways,
but you have a very good shot at finding a favorable judge
who will agree with you, that they have not complied
with the law here.
Then what happens, do you just stay
in your home happily ever after?
Well, that seems unlikely that they are going to let
60 million home-owners stay in their homes
without paying, so you know they are going to have
to make some adjustment, but that's Marcy Kaptur's point,
is that we need some leverage here and we've got it.
If you start staying in your homes, that's going to give us
some leverage, when they see 60 million people
who are saying "Prove it up" or at least make some
concession to 'cause they are not working it out,
the banks are not working it out with the home-owners
like they are supposed to be.
In fact, they can't work it out, and if they try
to work it out, then they don't actually have
title anymore, so it's the investors,
so they would have to make a deal with the investors,
well, their investors are going to say "No, the deal was
"you pay us X and we're not gonna agree to Y or whatever."
The message is, if you are dealing with
the situation where your home is being foreclosed upon,
maybe slow things down, don't panic,
start looking into this paper trail
and see what your options are
and I'm sure that there is going to be some kind
of collective legislation or something that will
come along.
Right, that's what I'm particularly interested in,
is this, with the leverage we can get out of this.
Yes.
That if everybody knows,
see, most people don't know and so they see
this foreclosure notice and they just pack their bags
and move on and they think "Well, I don't have the money
"and I cannot afford an attorney."
And they are out of there, first of all,
the property goes to ruin, it's not good for the neighbors,
Brings down the value of the neighborhood.
It's not good for anyone, yeah, for them to leave
and it's a lot harder to get your property back once you've,
after the foreclosure is over than if you raised
that defense at the time.
Comes back to the possession as nine tenths
of the law that still does hold some weight.
Thank you for helping clarify this situation about these
mortgages because I know even people,
that some of our viewers that are watching this right now
may be dealing with this kind of situation
and that's helpful to calm it down and put a little bit
of rational thinking over the top of it.
So, meanwhile, yes, please--
There is also a potential lawsuit here from the investors
because they too, it's not just the home-owners
who have been put in a compromised position,
but look at the investors, they were sold bill of goods,
so they can get together and there have been
class action lawsuits, but the more they are aware
of this possibility that it was actually a fraud
on part of the banks, I think they should turn around
and sue those Wall Street banks that setup those deals.
This would be Goldman Sachs is largely responsible,
and you know, these big, how are we going to bring down--
Like that's gonna happen,
they are still totally at the helm in the government.
How are we going to bring them down,
we need some kind--
Yeah, there needs to be some kind
of legislation, it is interesting because it seems
like Goldman Sachs is a revolving door towards
a governmental position, i.e. Geithner and others,
Falsom, there you go.
OK, let's move back into the rest of the...
The rest of the issues of the banking industry right now,
I know you've been working pretty fast and furiously
on an alternative to what's going on right now,
but let's talk about the problem of what is going on
and what kinds of banks are at risk right now
and which kinds of banks are a little bit better bet
if you are going to be banking with someone,
some entity that exists right now.
It's good if you can find a secured community bank,
that would be good, but some communities,
California lost 200 banks this year
and the problem is they don't tell you before
they close their doors.
No, no, it's very interesting.
You want to go carefully into it,
but ideally, at least in theory, if your local credit unions
and your local community banks are less likely
to be involved in all this Wall Street stuff,
but of course, in truth, probably nobody is more secure
than J.P Morgan or Chase because they own the government.
In truth, they are probably as secure as you can get,
but I wouldn't want to recommend that.
I know what you mean, I heard the same thing,
but thank you for clarifying that.
I certainly favor community banks,
but you do want to look into it to make sure,
if you can find one of those lists of banks
in jeopardy, make sure your bank is not on it
before you put a lot of money into it
and diversify, it's always good to have it in several
different banks.
Let's talk about some of the banks that really
are in trouble right now, some of the larger institutions
because most of us probably have our money
with the larger institutions.
I don't actually know which ones,
I haven't looked into that, I know my own small community
bank which I love, I read this article and it said
"The FDIC is bankrupt and therefore you may not be able
"to count on them covering your 250,000 dollar..."
"Up to 250,000 dollars in deposits."
You better look and make sure that your bank
isn't on this list.
They had this informal list attached to this article,
so I looked and sure enough there was my bank.
Yeah, that's a disappointment.
But I keep going in there and I say "How are things?"
And they say "Oh, fine, we're doing fine."
Haven't been laid off yet.
It's a very interesting thing that happens,
I was listening to NPR one day on a drive somewhere
and they were interviewing a person that deals with
takeovers of closings of banks and takeovers of banks.
It's something that's a very radical, almost violent
operation, that they come in and these banks are
sequestered usually on a Friday afternoon,
everybody is out, new team in,
maybe new signage is already up by Monday,
it happens very, very quickly, so there is no
advance warning if this is going to happen
to even the people in the bank.
Often the managers don't even know
that this is going to happen,
so it's not as though they can try to give you a little wink
and "I wouldn't put that check in here today."
They can't do that because they don't know.
In most cases you will be covered by FDIC,
in the event that they just switched over like you say,
but there is something like Northern Rock,
there are cases where people have just lost their money.
Yeah, yeah.
So, you're looking at this from a solution's point of view,
the way the system exists right now is not working
in the way that it's being implemented, but you are saying
there are elements of the banking system and even
fractionalized reserve banking that can work if
run through a little different lens.
Let's talk about some of your vision now
and focus on that.
Fractional reserve banking, at first you look at it
and you go "That's a fraud."
It does seem like it.
We're being taken advantage of here, that's not fair
and then the more you look at it, you go,
"Hey, we could do that."
We, the people, if it were a public bank,
it would be perfectly legitimate,
it would be perfectly sound,
mathematically sustainable because
first of all, let's say if it's particularly on a federal
level, all our money today consists of nothing but
the full faith in credit of the United States.
If you are the United States, you can issue credit
without any sort of reserves or capital because
what's the point of having reserves or credit
of your own credit.
You're just acknowledging that the person is a good
credit risk and you're giving a loan.
You are monetizing the person's own promise to repay.
So, if you were a community, publicly owned bank,
your function would be to make sure that this person
was actually credit-worthy and that they were going
to pay it back and if they were, you would give them
the credit, it wouldn't matter what you had on the way
of reserves, etc.
You don't have to find a pot of gold over here
in order for the community to trust the person
with their goods and services long enough
for the person to build whatever it is he wants to build
or however he proposes to pay this project back.
If you have publicly owned banks, but even assuming
you want to comply with the capital primer,
which is a good idea, so people don't freak out.
California, this is my favorite idea, would be for
California to form its own bank.
There is one state in the country that already
has its own bank, the Bank of North Dakota,
it is one of only two states that are able to meet
their budgets or will be by next year.
The other is Montana and the chart where I saw that,
they listed Montana as an oil state, but they said
nothing about North Dakota, what's in North Dakota?
Nothing, so why are they doing so well?
Because they have their own credit machine,
they have escape to the credit crisis that everybody
else is in.
And in North Dakota, the way they do it,
I just read this recently...
It's the State of North Dakota doing business
as the Bank of North Dakota,
in other words, it's a DBA,
that means that all of the assets of the state
are the assets of the bank.
When the regulator comes around or when you are trying
to get your charter and you say...
"California has 200 billion dollars worth
"of just real estate owned by the state."
I don't mean in that state, but owned by the state,
actual property, plus there is like 62 billion
invested in various, money invested.
So, we have funds, and we have a lot of assets
plus your revenues which you get every year.
If you actually did the fractional reserve thing
as a public bank, just say that 200 billion
of real estate could be leveraged into 2 trillion in loans.
Many people, different bankers will challenge me on that,
and say: "That's not the way it's done."
But that is the way it's done, if you look carefully,
that's all they pay attention to, when the regulator comes
around, or when they have to submit these reports.
I think it's every three months they have to submit
a report to the regulator showing
that they met their capital requirement, that's when they
look and they say: "OK, you have to have eight dollars
"of capital for a 100 dollars in loans."
And they say: "We've done that."
Or if they haven't done it, they sell off some loans
to some other bank and maybe buy them back later.
Or they borrow some reserves from the money
markets or from the Fed, but they just shift it around.
Nobody checks, when a borrower walks into a bank,
I asked two bankers this and they confirmed,
if you're a loan officer and a borrower walks into a bank
and they want a certain amount of loan,
do you check to see what you have in deposit here
to make sure that you are only lending 90 percent of that?
He said "No".
Somebody gives you a loan limit, it's a huge loan limit,
a big number and you can't make loans beyond that,
and I said "What if 10 loan officers make the same,
"hit the max at the same time?"
That's all right, no problem, so nobody is really.
Everybody assumes that somebody else
is watching, but I haven't been able to find
that one person that checks, except every three months
when they have to report what they've got,
and then they check and if they don't have it,
they fiddle with the books until they do have it.
This is a completely faith-based system.
Yeah, so if we, the public, if we could do the same thing
and we could create credit for all those things
we need, we could build, we could fund education,
we could fund healthcare and we could build
alternative energy projects, transportation.
Those are the ideals, the ones that actually pay money back.
Let's say you were building a mag-train,
what are they called, a mag-train, those really fast trains.
They go from L.A. to San Francisco, let's say that was
your project.
A type of bullet train.
Yeah.
You would set that, you would monetize it,
in other words, you'd say, this train is going to cost,
I have no idea what a train costs, buy you'd write that
sum up on one side of your books and then as if it were
a completed project, you're going to monetize the thing.
Then you pay your workers and materials out of that
and you pay the loan off out of the profits
made from the thing.
Since you're your own back, you're going to get
the interest back.
And interest, on average
for all government projects
adds up to 50 percent of the cost of the project,
so you would cut the cost of your project in half
right there just by saving the interest.
Just to make everything look fair, if other banks
will say: "Not fair", you can say "We're charging
"five percent interest."
Of course we get to keep the interest.
We get to keep it, right.
It seems very sane, it seems like a very sane idea
and if you look to North Dakota, it has proved
to be a very sustainable model for that state.
90 years.
90 years, but then you look at the fact
that California is the eight largest economy in the world
and you think "How do we even get our minds around
"doing this on such a large scale?"
How does one get their mind around that,
how does it begin, how does that play out?
It would be wonderful if California took the lead
because we're California, we take the lead
in everything, we're creative thinkers,
but it seems more likely that maybe,
for instance, Miami-Dade County is looking at
forming their own bank.
That's just a county, although it's population is actually
three times the population of North Dakota,
so if they did it, it would be a very dramatic model
if it worked, but somebody like that.
It would just be easier to get a consensus among your
legislators you can see we're going to have
an uphill battle.
Because of the lobbying, let's
talk about lobbying on Capitol Hill.
Capitol Hill I think is the worst,
that's one reason I'm more in favor of going
for a state or a county than into Congress
because Congress is bought and paid for by the banks,
but it's because they have the power to create money.
If we want to get Congress back, we've got to get
that power back.
This was foreseen from the beginning,
certainly from the beginning of this country.
If you care to share a little bit of history
about what was going to become Alexander Hamilton,
how we ended up in this position, maybe
famous comments from Thomas Jefferson,
just tell us what happened in that period of time
that would lead us to at least have an inkling
that something like this crisis would happen down the road.
For a hundred years before the Revolution,
we had our own system
that was competing with the bank notes
system of the bank of England
which setup this private central bank system.
Where the provinces issued money publicly.
It's publicly issued money versus privately issued money
and it worked really well for that hundred years.
Some of them worked better than others,
but it worked really well in Pennsylvania which is the model
we should go back to.
That was Benjamin Franklin's colony, he is called the father
of paper money, he raved about how this was why
there was so much abundance in the colonies
when in England they were already struggling with these
industrial revolution-type conditions.
In Pennsylvania what they did, in some of the colonies
they just printed money, printed money and printed money
and that was inflationary so that wasn't such a great idea,
but in Pennsylvania, the province owned the bank.
Before they setup this bank, nobody wanted to go
to Pennsylvania because there was no money there
and they had to borrow from the British bankers
at eight percent interest, borrow gold
and even then, there weren't that many,
even at eight percent it was hard to do,
to get money.
So, Benjamin Franklin didn't actually originate the system,
it was the province of Pennsylvania, but they had
setup a bank so they would lend money
to the farmers and then the money
would come to the province,
so they would lend the same money over and over again
and then to cover the interest so you didn't have this
sort of parasitic pyramid scheme like we have
with private interest, they issued a little extra
and spent it on government needs
so then you would have enough money out there
to pay principle and interest.
So, then you never had to increase the money supply.
During the time they had that system, they paid no taxes,
they had no government debt and the prices
did not inflate, it was a perfect system.
But then, and that according to Benjamin Franklin,
that was a major reason we fought the revolution
was that King George took away the power of the colonists
to print new issues of money, that's what the order was
and they did it for a reason.
Merchants were complaining because they were dealing with
13 different currencies, they didn't know
what the value of these different things were
and some of them weren't sustainably done,
they were deflating.
Right, right.
There was some logic to it, but that meant
that we had to borrow gold from the British bankers
in order to pay our taxes, so that's what the
taxation without representation thing was all about,
not just that we were being taxed,
but we were being taxed in a currency we were not allowed
to create and we had no control over.
The farmers were losing their farms, there is general
rebellion and they just went back to their old system
which was considered an act of rebellion and we had
the revolution which we won issuing paper receipts
which is a remarkable thing, it never had been done before,
to win a war just with these paper receipts without
actually having what was called real money then,
like gold and silver.
But we lost the ability to create our own money,
because, that's kind of a long story,
the British were heavily counterfeiting this currency
as a matter of war policy.
Actually, Napoleon did the same thing--
Flooding our markets with it.
Yeah, they were the ones that were printing too much.
Subterfuge going on there, yes.
So that devalued the currency, plus it had to compete
with the other currencies which were more stable,
so by the end of the war it had completely collapsed
and the founding fathers were so suspicious of it
that they couldn't agree whether to put it in
the constitution or not.
I guess there were actually riots outside
the constitutional convention, so they had to do something
fast, the soldiers wanted their money, etc.
So, they said, they were kind of vague
about who had the power to create money,
they said Congress will have the power to coin money,
that's all it says in the constitution.
Meanwhile, they got out of there
and the first treasure secretary, Alexander Hamilton
was stuck with all these war debts and no money
to pay them with so he resorted to the rules
used in England, which was to setup the first U.S. bank
which was actually privately owned.
They put the government's gold into it,
what gold they had and then they could create 10 times
that sum in bank notes, lend them to the government
and so now there was plenty of money to pay off their debts,
it was a ruse, but it worked and everybody trusted
these bank notes more than they would've trusted
their government-issued money because
it was supposedly backed by gold.
But the problem was it put us in debt
to these private bankers pretending to have money,
Benjamin Franklin called them "Bold and bankrupt
"adventurers just pretending to have money."
At first, he didn't get it either and at first
he blamed the paper money, and then later,
he realized that they had been taken.
I think it was 1813, he said in a letter
that he thought that bankers were more dangerous
than standing armies and that the issuing power
should be returned to the people, to whom it belonged,
in other words, he thought the government should be
issuing the money, but that's not what happened.
The bankers got in control and we had
our Federal Reserve System setup formally in 1913,
giving a private central bank, privately owned by
many banks the power to issue money and lend it
to our government and lend it to the other banks.
That's where we are today.
Federal Reserve, do we need it?
It's actually a useful thing to have a central bank,
I know there is two possibilities, we certainly
don't need it as a private central bank,
either we should nationalize it, which is what
I would favor just because it's handy to have
your own bank which then you can deal with
other central banks and issue your currency and stuff.
Or abolish it and have the treasury issue the money.
The U.S. treasury issue the money, yes.
What do you see right now as our greatest hope rather
than obstacle, we see all the obstacles,
what's the greatest hope we can do,
how can we participate in this process?
Although it seems like a quite difficult
and dangerous time, it is our opportunity
because the old has to fall apart before
you can put in something new.
We knew when Milton Friedman who I don't necessarily
agree with in general, but he said back when somebody
proposed a hundred percent reserve solution,
he said: "Well, that's a good idea, but it's
"not going to happen as long as the economy
"is rolling along."
But when everything collapses like in the 30s,
that's when all these alternative proposals start to look
pretty good, so it is our opportunity,
but we have to snatch it fast because there is a sort
of police state scenario that is shaping up in the meantime
or global central bank that is private
that would force us to borrow like everybody else
from this private global central bank.
How do we begin doing this,
where do we begin applying the pressure
or demanding to set down for a dialogue
to create better solutions?
We do need to get organized and the first thing
is to understand what the problem is.
That's what I'm trying to do, put the information out there
and then we could form, I think a political action committee
would be a good idea or you can form,
somebody just wrote to me wanting to form a lobby,
a home-owners lobby, I think that's a great idea,
but anything we can do to get organized.
We need an aggressive movement and we've
obviously seen that we can't just rely on voting
the right leader and that they'll take care of everything.
Should we let those leaders know
that we're very unhappy with what has transpired
and this is no longer sustainable in our eyes,
you still need to make noise even if they are not
going to effectively do anything, right?
Right.
It's planning these ideas, we don't have to bail out
these bankrupt banks, they are crooks,
that we have an alternative, we can setup our own credit
system, we can do exactly what they are doing
much better.
We've got the assets, we've got the capital,
we've got the reserves, we can put all our own money
in our own bank.
That's what they do in North Dakota,
by law all of the state's revenues go into the bank
of North Dakota, so there is their huge deposit base
which then they can leverage into many times
that sum of loans.
For people that want to follow up on this
and take it a little bit further,
they can go to your website, is that correct?
That's "Web of debt dot com" and I have many,
many articles on there.
Yes, you do and we post a lot
of your articles.
For a lot of our viewers and readers,
here is the face of Ellen who does these incredible articles
that are also posted through the Huffington Post,
now they can see who Ellen is.
I really appreciate you taking the time,
I know you are jamming here at this conference
to go from one to the next, thank you.
Thank you.
For an expanded understanding
of the topics brought up in this interview,
you can go to Ellen's website at "Web of Debt dot com"
to read her articles, blogs or pick up a copy of her book.
You might also enjoy some of our other interviews
exploring alternative economic models
with Tom Greco and Stephanie Rorick.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.